# OLG
- The savings rate $s$ is no longer a constant. Because we knwo people hcange the amount they save, Ex japan saved 40% after ww2. / argentina afeter confiscations / argentina mortality rate after the crash. 
- It is determined by choices of individuals
- These models are sometimes included inside RBC models
  - for example, in models where collateral is needed to borrow to buy capital
  - where you want people to have a finite life or probability of death
  - What will happen to their assets?
  - Entrepeneurs that discount more,so you add probabilities of death
- Useful models: a large literature uses these models
  - education
  - growth
  - assets holding and money. the value of gold (industrial: wiring in satellites)
  - retirement

bayesian? People updating their beliefs about their probability of death?

- Peter Diamond (1965) "National debt in a neoclassical growth model," AER p.1126-1150.
- McCandless and Wallace (1991) Introduction to Dynamic Macroeconomic Theory, Chapter 9

## Model
No end periods, non stochastic
Individuals live two periods
  - Lives in periods $t$ and $t + 1$
  - They are dead in periods $t + 2$ and onwards. No utility in $t+2$ and on. 
  - There are $N(t)$ members of generation $t$. Population growth and decline
### CONSUMPTION
Person $h$, generation $t$. 
$$
u_t^h(c_t^h(t), c_t^h(t + 1))
$$
### LABOR
$$
h_t^h = [h_t^h(t), h_t^h(t + 1)]
$$
Even old people can work

### CAPITAL
- Capital is saved (or bought) by young at end of period $t$ and used in $t + 1$
Generates value of non productive assets

### PRODUCTION

- Production technology (constant returns to scale)

$$Y(t) = F(K(t), H(t))$$

- **Total labor** supplied in period $t$

$$H(t) = \sum_{h=1}^{N(t)} h_t^h(t) + \sum_{h=1}^{N(t-1)} h_{t-1}^h(t)$$

Useful to define **total amout of labor** supplied by each generation in period $t$

$$H_t(t) = \sum_{h=1}^{N(t)} h_t^h(t) \qquad H_{t-1}(t) = \sum_{h=1}^{N(t-1)} h_{t-1}^h(t)$$
## FEASIBILITY
$$
Y(t) = F(K(t), H(t)) \geq \sum_{h=1}^{N(t)} c_t^h(t) + \sum_{h=1}^{N(t-1)} c_{t-1}^h(t) + K(t + 1)
$$
$Y(t)$ can also be capital that hasn't depreciated. If you multuply both sides by (1-delta) you can figure out the pricing of capital.
- if only $\delta K(t)$ depreciates, the old could sell the $(1 - \delta) K(t)$ that remains to young

### BUDGET CONSTRAINT YOUNG:
Income is fixed, vahnges a function of wage. They can consume, lend it (l) 
$$w_t h_t^h(t) = c_t^h(t) + l^h(t) + k^h(t + 1)$$
- Can only lend to own generation
- so an equilibrium condition is

$$0 = \sum_{h=1}^{N(t)} l^h(t)$$
Young people make decisions, and old people are subject to their own previous decisions, their past chose $k^h(t + 1)$. 

### BUDGET CONSTRAINT OLD:
$$
c_t^h(t + 1) = w_{t+1} h_t^h(t + 1) + r_t l^h(t) + rental_{t+1} k^h(t + 1)
$$

- $r_t$ is the interest rate on private loans
- $rental_{t+1}$ is the rental rate on capital when it is being used
- here we assume that capital depreciates 100% in the period of use

Change it for old and young if capital didnt wear out completely. 


### FACTOR MARKETS
Perfect competition. So, if firms maximize profits, we get the conditions that

$$w_t = F_H(K(t), H(t))$$

and

$$rental_t = F_K(K(t), H(t))$$

## Lifetime budget

**Combine the two budget constraints through $l_h(t)$**. Assume perfect foresight (not reasonable but easy to do). **The lifetime budget constraint is**
$$
c_t^h(t) + \frac{c_t^h(t + 1)}{r_t} = w_t h_t^h(t) + \frac{w_{t+1} h_t^h(t + 1)}{r_t} - k^h(t + 1) \left[1 - \frac{rental_{t+1}}{r_t}\right]
$$
with perfect foresight no risk so you know the payment of assets. with two assets the returns must be equal. that means $\frac{rental_{t+1}}{r_t}=1$. That is the Arbitrage condition (actually NO arbitrage condition):
$$rental_{t+1} = r_t$$

- **What if not true:** two options $rental_{t+1} < r_t$ or $rental_{t+1} > r_t$
**If $rental_{t+1} < r_t$**
  - Everyone wants to lend and no one holds capital. Economy with no capital.
  - But marginal product of capital $\to \infty$ when $K(t) \to 0$. but it cant still be less than lending rates.
  - Not an equilibrium (no demand)
**If $rental_{t+1} > r_t$**
  - Everyone wants to borrow an infinite amount to buy capital. Too much demand for lending. So no supply.
  - This can't be an equilibrium (no supply)
**Only $rental_{t+1} = r_t$ remains as possibility**
No private lending and everuone with capital . or one person who borrwos from everybody at $r$ and holds capital and esarns returns and pays that out. In the individual level you dont knwo who or how many do what. 

$$
\boxed{c_t^h(t) + \frac{c_t^h(t + 1)}{r_t} = w_t h_t^h(t) + \frac{w_{t+1} h_t^h(t + 1)}{r_t}}
$$


## Equilibrium

A **competitive equilibrium** is a sequence of prices, $\{w_t, rental_t, r_t\}_{t=0}^{\infty}$, and quantities, $\{\{c_t^h(t)\}_{h=1}^{N(t)}, \{c_{t-1}^h(t)\}_{h=1}^{N(t-1)}, K(t + 1)\}_{t=0}^{\infty}$, such that

each member $h$ of each generation $t > 0$ maximizes the utility function,

$$u_t^h(c_t^h(t), c_t^h(t + 1))$$

subject to the lifetime budget constraint,

$$c_t^h(t) + \frac{c_t^h(t + 1)}{r_t} = w_t h_t^h(t) + \frac{w_{t+1} h_t^h(t + 1)}{r_t}$$

and the equilibrium conditions,

$$r_t = rental_{t+1}$$
$$w_t = F_H(K(t), H(t))$$
$$rental_t = F_K(K(t), H(t))$$
$$H(t) = \sum_{h=1}^{N(t)} h_t^h(t) + \sum_{h=1}^{N(t-1)} h_{t-1}^h(t)$$
$$K(t) = \sum_{h=1}^{N(t-1)} k_{t-1}^h(t)$$

hold in every period.
Non stationary, it encompases a lot of conditions

## Solutions
Solution wiht one variable:
$$
\max_{c_t^h(t)} u(c_t^h(t), \quad  r_t w_t h_t^h(t) + w_{t+1} h_t^h(t + 1) - r_t c_t^h(t))
$$
FOC:
$$
u_1(c_t^h(t), r_t w_t h_t^h(t) + w_{t+1} h_t^h(t + 1) - r_t c_t^h(t)) = r_t u_2(c_t^h(t), r_t w_t h_t^h(t) + w_{t+1} h_t^h(t + 1) - r_t c_t^h(t))
$$

Can be solved for $c_t^h(t)$. 
Then for savings, as functions of prices:
$$s_t^h(w_t, w_{t+1}, r_t) = l^h(t) + k^h(t + 1)$$
**Note:** from budget constraint when young, $s_t^h = w_t h_t^h(t) - c_t^h(t)$ and $h_t^h(t)$ and $h_t^h(t + 1)$ are given

Implicit aggreagte savings:
$$
S_t(\cdot) \equiv \sum_{h=1}^{N(t)} s_t^h(\cdot) =  \underbrace{ \sum_{h=1}^{N(t)} l^h(t) }_{ =0 } + \sum_{h=1}^{N(t)} k^h(t + 1)
$$
$$
S_t(w_t, w_{t+1}, r_t) = K(t + 1)
$$
Looking for $K$ 

$$w_t = F_H(K(t), H(t))$$
$$rental_t = F_K(K(t), H(t))$$
Rewritting savings
$$
S_t(F_H(K(t), H(t)), F_H(K(t+1), H(t+1)), F_K(K(t+1), H(t+1))) = K(t + 1)
$$
**This can be simplified (since $H(t)$ and $H(t + 1)$ are constants) to get a function of the form**

$$K(t + 1) = G(K(t))$$

**Given some initial $K(0)$, the time path of the economy can be found by repeatedly applying this equation**
## Example
Utility, taking logs, log-utility, its all the same
$$
u_t^h = u(c_t^h(t), c_t^h(t + 1)) = c_t^h(t) c_t^h(t + 1)^{\beta}
$$
$$
Y_t = F(K(t), H(t)) = K(t)^{\theta} H(t)^{1-\theta}
$$

**After a bunch of algebra,**

$$K(t + 1) = G(K(t)) = \frac{\theta \beta \frac{H_t(t)}{H(t)^{\theta}} }{ \left[\frac{H_t(t+1)}{H(t+1)}\right]  + \frac{\theta(1+\beta)}{(1-\theta)} } K(t)^{\theta} = \kappa K(t)^{\theta}$$

where $\kappa$ is a constant that depends on parameters and exogenous things. It is a function of decisons made by people. Unlike the solow model.

$$\kappa = \frac{\theta \beta \frac{H_t(t)}{H(t)^{\theta}} }{ \left[\frac{H_t(t+1)}{H(t+1)}\right]  + \frac{\theta(1+\beta)}{(1-\theta)} }$$







# Deterministic Infinite Horizon


