Es un Ramsey con costos de ajuste de inversion y con funcion GHH. La rpima es elastica al stock de deuda porque sino si es fija, queres implemetnar cambio permamnete en la deuda y por eso no seria estacionario.
Para solicionar es linearliar, aproximacion de primer orden en el equilibrio estacionario sin shocks y todas las variables son constantes.

## Calibrar los parámetros a los datos:
la prima es elástica en torno a un valor de deuda $\bar{d}$ 
- con fuentes no relacionados a los datos que el modelo explica: $\sigma$ y $\delta$
Elige $\sigma=2$, $\delta=0.1$
- con los primeros momentos de los datos. $\boxed{\alpha,r^*,\bar{b}}$
El estado estacionario coincide con el proedio de esas variables. En estado estacionario se pueden computar a mano y ese sería el valor promedio. $\alpha$, producto por el lado del ingreso, empleo divididos importaciones, calculado. Share de los factores. Usas el promedio de los datos que tenés
$r^*$ tasa real exógena, elegida en promedio de la tasa real de EEUU (tasa de la fed - inflación). 
Porque todo es ratios no importa si no son per capita. Macro-migration.

¿Cuál es la medida de l PBI? en la cuestio de la escala no afecta la medida. Calibrar mirando ratios para no preocuparte por las medidas. pero la deuda no se puede ver directamente porque no sep ueden medir directament los activos externosnetos, nada más se estiman, porque van cambiando de valor y eso no se contabiliza. La deuda NETA no contabiliza valuaciones. 
$r^*\bar{d}=tb$  es la condicion de equilibrio: que los superavits de balanza comercial sean intereses de deuda que hay que pagar (y para tb hay buenas estimaciones en cuentas nacionales). Que $\bar{d}$ sea el promedio del $\frac{tb}{y}$ en el periodo.
El modelo no distingue nominal y real, pero no tienen por que ser iguales (el argumento es que en largos plazos son similares)
- con los segundos momentos de los datos. $\boxed{\omega,\phi,\psi,\rho,\eta}$
Desvios estandar de 
$\omega$ :horas trabajadas, desvio estandar del dato
$\phi$ :inversion (porque el costo de ajsute es(ta relaicionado con) la volatilidad de la inversión)
$\psi$ :varianza de $\frac{tb}{y}$
$\rho$ :varianza del producto es volatilidad de shocks de productividad
$\eta$ :autocorrelacion del producto (persistencia)
(no usas el momento del consumo porque no lo haces matchear lo que queres explicar.) (pregunta si se puede replicar el ratio de consumo producto de los datos con el que predice el modelo en el que consumo queda endogeno)
Implementación:
Mminimza la distancia de los momentos que da el modelo con los que te dan los numeros
$$
\left[ m^*-m(\theta) \right] '\left[ m^*-m(\theta) \right]
$$
Metodo generalizado de momentos .


## Shocks (de productividad)
El modelo simula el efecto en los datos de un shock y se puede chequear el modelo contra los datos de un shock. 
Deterministico: Reacción a un shock de compara el modelo si no hay shock con el modelo con shock. 
Estocastico: Ves el promedio de las variables aleatorias , evaluas en un shock que tome un valor en particular y comparas el promedio de las vairables con el shock particular y sin.
$$
\text{IRF}(y_{t+h};\varepsilon_{t}^{i}=s, \quad X^{t-1}) \equiv \underbrace{ E(y_{t+h}| \varepsilon_{t}^{i}=s, \quad X^{t-1}) }_{\text{Datos con shock} } - \underbrace{ E(y_{t+h}, \quad X^{t-1}) }_{  \text{Datos sin shock}} 
$$

Aumento persistente en $A_{t}$ es un efecto ingreso positivo
Efecto sustitución: 
- intraperiodo, deciosn entre consumo y trabajo: Aprovechar el efecto para trabajar más y consumir más en el futuro: sustituir a favor de horas trabajadas. En todos los periodos sube el consumo
- interperiodo, consumo hoy y mañana: dif entre productividad entre hoy y mañana. Como se mantiene la tasa de interes, no te cambia el precio de consumit hoy o mañana. Sabes que sos mas productivo hoy que mañana (dependiendo del $\rho$): En terminos relativos trabajarias mas hoy porque sos mas productivo y trabajar relativamente menos mañana (bajar consumo hoy y subirlo mañana).
Hay dos efectos que te dicen que el consumo tiene que subir asi que es probable que domine. pero la oferta de trabajo no sabes, porque por efecto ingreso dice que cae pero por sustitucion sube. (en el periodo del shock)


- Producto aumenta porque lo afecta la productividad, eso seguro: el capital si aumenta tambien aumenta el producto, aunque solo se materializa en el siguiente periodo. 

Mas persistencia, es menos ahorro y mas inversion lo cual empeora la balanza comercial. 


## Linearización
Tomas el mismo modelo y lo aproximas con series de taylor. Otra opcion es hacer lo mismo pero con los logaritmos. En taylor elegis el punto de steady state que se puede computar y al rededor de ese punto linearizas. 

Estacionariedad: requeire que el pronostico converja, no tienda a infinito
Si eso sucede todas las condiciones de transversalidad se cumplen, para cualquier variable.


# Linear Approximations for DSGE Models

- Uhlig, H., 1999, "A Toolkit for Analyzing Nonlinear Dynamic Stochastic Models Easily," in Computational Methods for the Study of Dynamic Economies.
- Uribe M. and S. Schmitt-Grohe, 2017, Open Economy Macroeconomics. Ch. 4.14.

## Equilibrium conditions RBC-SOE

$$A_t F(k_t, h_t) + d_t = c_t + k_{t+1} - (1 - \delta)k_t + d_{t-1}[1 + r^* + p(d_{t-1})] + \Phi(k_{t+1} - k_t).$$

$$- U_h(c_t, h_t) = U_c(c_t, h_t)A_t F_h(k_t, h_t)$$

$$U_c(c_t, h_t) = \beta[1 + r^* + p(d_t)]E_t[U_c(c_{t+1}, h_{t+1})]$$

$$U_c(c_t, h_t)[1 + \Phi'(k_{t+1} - k_t)] = \beta E_t U_c(c_{t+1}, h_{t+1})...$$
$$\qquad  \dots [A_{t+1}F_k(k_{t+1}, h_{t+1}) + 1 - \delta + \Phi'(k_{t+2} - k_{t+1})]$$

$$\lim_{j\to\infty} E_t \frac{d_{t+j}}{\prod_{s=0}^j(1 + r_s)} = 0.$$

$$\ln A_t = \rho \ln A_{t-1} + \eta\epsilon_t,$$

## Linearization and Log-Linearization

- We will approximate equilibrium conditions by **linearization** or **log-linearization**.
  - Linearization: a first-order Taylor expansion around the steady-state (SS).
  - Log-Linearization: the same, but in terms of logs of the variables.
- We choose the steady state as the approximation point because we can compute it "easily."
- In general we will log-linearize to have the interpretation in % terms. But for some variables we can not do this if they can take zero or negative values.
- Linearization: a first-order Taylor expansion of equation $f(x_{1,t}, ..., x_{n,t}) = 0$ around $x_1, ..., x_n$ is:

$$f(x_1, ..., x_n) + f_1(x_1, ..., x_n)(x_{1,t} - x_1) + ... + f_n(x_1, ..., x_n)(x_{n,t} - x_n) = 0,$$

where $f_j(x_1, ..., x_n)$ is the derivative of $f$ with respect to $x_{j,t}$, evaluated at $x_1, ..., x_n$.

- As the steady state is an equilibrium, $f(x_1, ..., x_n) = 0$. Then the approximation is just,

$$f_1(x_1, ..., x_n)(x_{1,t} - x_1) + ... + f_n(x_1, ..., x_n)(x_{n,t} - x_n) = 0.$$

## Linearization and Log-Linearization (continued)

- For log-linearization, consider the change of variables $\hat{x}_{j,t} \equiv \ln(x_{j,t}) - \ln(x_j)$. This implies that $\hat{x}_j = 0$. Also, with this definition we can write $x_{j,t} = x_j e^{\hat{x}_{j,t}}$.
- To log-linearize the expression $f(x_{1,t}, ..., x_{n,t}) = 0$ around $x_1, ..., x_n$ we first apply a change of variables

$$f(x_1 e^{\hat{x}_{1,t}}, ..., x_n e^{\hat{x}_{n,t}}) = 0,$$

and then take a Taylor expansion:

$$f(x_1 e^{\hat{x}_1}, ..., x_n e^{\hat{x}_n}) + f_1(x_1 e^{\hat{x}_1}, ..., x_n e^{\hat{x}_n})x_1 e^{\hat{x}_1}(\hat{x}_{1,t} - \hat{x}_1) + ...$$
$$+ f_n(x_1 e^{\hat{x}_1}, ..., x_n e^{\hat{x}_n})x_n e^{\hat{x}_n}(\hat{x}_{n,t} - \hat{x}_n) = 0,$$

- Because $\hat{x}_j = 0$, this simplifies to

$$f(x_1, ..., x_n) + f_1(x_1, ..., x_n)x_1\hat{x}_{1,t} + ... + f_n(x_1, ..., x_n)x_n\hat{x}_{n,t} = 0,$$

Finally, using $f(x_1, ..., x_n) = 0$, we get

$$f_1(x_1, ..., x_n)x_1\hat{x}_{1,t} + ... + f_n(x_1, ..., x_n)x_n\hat{x}_{n,t} = 0,$$

- A combination of linearization for some variables and log-linearization for others can easily be accommodated.

## Linearization and Log-Linearization (examples)

- Some examples: Suppose we want to log-linearize the expression $y_t = x_t^\alpha z_t^\beta$.
  - We can write $ye^{\hat{y}_t} = x^\alpha e^{\alpha\hat{x}_t} z^\beta e^{\beta\hat{z}_t}$.
  - Given that $y = x^\alpha z^\beta$, then $e^{\hat{y}_t} = e^{\alpha\hat{x}_t+\beta\hat{z}_t}$.
  - Taking a first-order Taylor expansion around the SS, we get $\hat{y}_t = \alpha\hat{x}_t + \beta\hat{z}_t$.

- If we have $y_t = \alpha x_t + \beta z_t$, we get $\hat{y}_t = \frac{\alpha x}{\alpha x+\beta z}\hat{x}_t + \frac{\beta z}{\alpha x+\beta z}\hat{z}_t$ (prove it at home)

- Example with Expectations:
$$(c_t)^{-\sigma} = \beta E_t\{q_{t+1}(c_{t+1})^{-\sigma}\} \Rightarrow -\sigma\hat{c}_t = E_t\{\hat{q}_{t+1}\} - \sigma E_t\{\hat{c}_{t+1}\}$$

i.e. linearize (or log-linearize) inside the expectation. Notice: there is no covariance term.

## Log-Linearization

In the RBC-SOE model,

$$[\epsilon_{hh} - \epsilon_{ch}]\hat{h}_t + [\epsilon_{hc} - \epsilon_{cc}]\hat{c}_t = \hat{A}_t + \alpha(\hat{k}_t - \hat{h}_t)$$

$$E_t\hat{A}_{t+1} = \rho\hat{A}_t$$

$$\frac{1}{y}\hat{d}_t = \frac{1}{y}[\psi_1 d + 1 + r^*]\hat{d}_{t-1} + s_c\hat{c}_t$$

$$+ \frac{s_i}{\delta}[\hat{k}_{t+1} - (1 - \delta)\hat{k}_t]$$

$$-\hat{A}_t - \alpha\hat{k}_t - (1 - \alpha)\hat{h}_t$$

$$\epsilon_{ch}\hat{h}_t + \epsilon_{cc}\hat{c}_t = \psi_1\beta\hat{d}_t + \epsilon_{ch}E_t\hat{h}_{t+1} + \epsilon_{cc}E_t\hat{c}_{t+1}$$

$$\epsilon_{cc}\hat{c}_t + \epsilon_{ch}\hat{h}_t + \Phi''(0)k(\hat{k}_{t+1} - \hat{k}_t) = \epsilon_{cc}E_t\hat{c}_{t+1} + \epsilon_{ch}E_t\hat{h}_{t+1}$$

$$+ \frac{r^* + \delta}{1 + r^*}\left[E_t\hat{A}_{t+1} + (\alpha - 1)(E_t\hat{k}_{t+1} - E_t\hat{h}_{t+1})\right]$$

$$+ \frac{\Phi''(0)k}{1 + r^*}[E_t\hat{k}_{t+2} - E_t\hat{k}_{t+1}]$$

Derive these as an exercise. See USG, section 4.6 for details.

## General specification of DSGE models

- The RBC-SOE model is a case of a more general class of DSGE models, which can be written as

$$E_t \{G (\xi_{t+1}, \xi_t, \xi_{t-1}, \epsilon_t)\} = 0, \tag{1}$$

- Notation:
  - $\xi_t$ $(n \times 1)$ contains all variables in the model; either endogenous (like consumption, gdp, etc.) or exogenous (like productivity, the world interest rate, etc.).
  - $\epsilon_t$ are innovations (associated with exogenous variables), which we assume are i.i.d., whit zero mean and variance-covariance matrix $\Sigma$.
- Notice timing convention: here $t$ indicates the period in which variables are decided (if endogenous) or realized (if exogenous).
- We can easily add more leads and lags redefining the vector of variables.

## General specification of DSGE models (continued)

- Definition of equilibrium: A stationary RE equilibrium is the set of stationary process $\{\xi_t\}_{t=1}^{\infty}$ satisfying (1), for given initial values $\xi_0$.
- That the processes are stationary means,

$$\lim_{j\to\infty} |E_t\{\xi_{t+j}\}| < \infty.$$

In particular, this implies that all relevant transversality conditions are satisfied.

- The general (possibly non-linear) solution (a.k.a. policy functions) will take the form:

$$\xi_t = H(\xi_{t-1}, \epsilon_t),$$

- Instead, we will find an approximated solution:

$$\hat{\xi}_t = F\hat{\xi}_{t-1} + Q\epsilon_t$$

where $\hat{\xi}_t = \xi_t - \xi$ (difference relative to the steady state).

## Finding the solution

- We begin by linearizing the equilibrium conditions (1) and putting them in matrix form:

$$AE_t\{\hat{\xi}_{t+1}\} + B\hat{\xi}_t + C\hat{\xi}_{t-1} + D\epsilon_t = 0,$$

where $A$, $B$, $C$ and $D$ are the derivatives of the function $G$ with respect to, respectively, $\hat{\xi}_{t+1}$, $\hat{\xi}_t$, $\hat{\xi}_{t-1}$ and $\epsilon_t$, evaluated at the steady state.

- We use the method of undetermined coefficients (guess and verify). We look for a solution of the form

$$\hat{\xi}_t = F\hat{\xi}_{t-1} + Q\epsilon_t$$

## Finding the solution (continued)

- Assuming $\hat{\xi}_t = F\hat{\xi}_{t-1} + Q\epsilon_t$ is the solution, then

$$E_t\{\hat{\xi}_{t+1}\} = F\hat{\xi}_t,$$

- Replacing in the linearized equilibrium conditions we get

$$A \cdot F\hat{\xi}_t + B\hat{\xi}_t + C\hat{\xi}_{t-1} + D\epsilon_t = 0,$$

- Re-arranging (assume $(A \cdot F + B)$ is invertible for the moment):

$$\hat{\xi}_t = -(A \cdot F + B)^{-1}(C\hat{\xi}_{t-1} + D\epsilon_t).$$

- Thus, for the proposed solution to be indeed a solution we need:

$$F = -(A \cdot F + B)^{-1}C$$
$$Q = -(A \cdot F + B)^{-1}D$$

The first can be used to solve for $F$ (this is similar to a quadratic equation in $F$), while the second gives $Q$. The appendix shows how to compute these in a more general framework.

- Notice, the solution is independent from $\Sigma$

## Some Remarks

- We have shown how to solve the linear version of the model, but not the log-linear. To do the log-linear we have to transform the variables and then linearize using the transformed variables.
- Linear vs. log-linear.
- Drawbacks of first order approximations:
  - No asymmetric responses.
  - No role for volatility.
  - Responses proportional to the shocks' size (no difference between small and large shocks).

## Second Moments

- Recall that the linearized solution can be written as,

$$\hat{\xi}_t = F\hat{\xi}_{t-1} + Q\epsilon_t$$

where $\epsilon_t$ i.i.d with $E(\epsilon_t) = 0$ and $E(\epsilon_t\epsilon'_t) = \Sigma$.

- Unconditional mean: if the solution is stationary, $E(\hat{\xi}_t) = E(\hat{\xi}_{t-1})$. Applying expectations to the solution,

$$E(\hat{\xi}_t) = FE(\hat{\xi}_t) + E(\epsilon_t) \Rightarrow E(\hat{\xi}_t) = 0 \Rightarrow E(\xi_t) = \xi.$$

The steady state is also the unconditional mean of the variable.

- The variance-covariance matrix $E\{\hat{\xi}_t\hat{\xi}'_t\} = E\{\hat{\xi}_{t-1}\hat{\xi}'_{t-1}\}$ satisfies:

$$E\{\hat{\xi}_t\hat{\xi}'_t\} = FE\{\hat{\xi}_t\hat{\xi}'_t\}F' + Q\Sigma Q'.$$

(Prove this at home. The assumption $E(\epsilon_t\hat{\xi}'_{t-1}) = 0$ is relevant here)
This can then be solved for $E\{\hat{\xi}_t\hat{\xi}'_t\}$ using matrix algebra.

- For auto-covariances,

$$E\{\hat{\xi}_t\hat{\xi}'_{t-j}\} = F^jE\{\hat{\xi}_t\hat{\xi}'_t\}.$$

(Prove this at home)

## Computing unconditional second moments

- We can then ask: How important are each of the shocks in the model to explain the variance of a given variable?
- We simply use the formula to compute $diag(E\{\hat{\xi}_t\hat{\xi}'_t\})$ but assuming that all but one shock have variance equal to zero.
- If we repeat this for all the shocks, the sum of each of them will equal the total variance that we compute using all the shocks simultaneously.
- This is true due to the linearity of the model, as long as the shocks are independent (i.e. $\Sigma$ is diagonal).

## Forecast and Impulse Responses

- The $h$-step ahead forecast conditional on given values at $t$ is,

$$E(\hat{\xi}_{t+h}|\hat{\xi}_t) = E_t(\hat{\xi}_{t+h}) = (F)^h\hat{\xi}_t.$$

- Recall IRF of variable $\hat{\xi}^i$ at time $t + h$ to a unit shock $\epsilon^j$ at time $t$ is

$$IRF(\hat{\xi}^i_{t+h}; \epsilon^j_t = s, \hat{\xi}_{t-1}) \equiv E\{\hat{\xi}^i_{t+h}|\epsilon^j_t = s, \hat{\xi}_{t-1}\} - E\{\hat{\xi}^i_{t+h}|\hat{\xi}_{t-1}\}.$$

- Notice that $E\{\hat{\xi}_{t+h}|\epsilon_t, \hat{\xi}_{t-1}\} - E\{\hat{\xi}_{t+h}|\hat{\xi}_{t-1}\} = ...$

$$(F)^h(F\hat{\xi}_{t-1} + Q\epsilon_t) - (F)^h(F\hat{\xi}_{t-1}) = (F)^hQ\epsilon_t.$$

- Then

$$IRF(\hat{\xi}^i_{t+h}, \epsilon^j_t = s, \hat{\xi}_{t-1}) = \left[(F)^hQ\right]_{i,j} s$$

Notice: due to linearity, the IRF is independent from the initial value $(\hat{\xi}_{t-1})$, and proportional to the size of the shock $(s)$.

## Existence, Uniqueness, Multiplicity

- How do we know if the solution exists and its unique? The answer depends in part on the kind of variables the model has. Two types:
  - Predetermined: variables appearing at $t-1$ in the equations (exogenous, or endogenous that are decided before shocks at $t$ are realized). In the RBC SOE: productivity, capital and debt.
  - Non-predetermined: variables that do appear only at $t$ or $t + 1$, but **not** at $t - 1$. In the RBC SOE: consumption, hours.
  - To simplify, assume predetermined variables cannot appear at $t + 1$; but this can be included.

- To grasp some intuition on the conditions for uniqueness, suppose $\xi_t$ is a scalar and that $\epsilon_t = 0$. Two cases:

Case I (predetermined only):  $B\hat{\xi}_t + C\hat{\xi}_{t-1} = 0$.
Case II (non-predetermined only):  $A\hat{\xi}_{t+1} + B\hat{\xi}_t = 0$.

Recall the general system was: $AE_t\{\hat{\xi}_{t+1}\} + B\hat{\xi}_t + C\hat{\xi}_{t-1} + D\epsilon_t = 0$

## Existence and uniqueness of the solution of a linearized model

- Case I: only a pre-determined variable, $B\hat{\xi}_t + C\hat{\xi}_{t-1} = 0$:
  - We can write $\hat{\xi}_t = -(B)^{-1}C\hat{\xi}_{t-1}$. Given that the solution should exist for any possible initial value $\hat{\xi}_0$ for predetermined variables, in order to have $\lim_{j\to\infty}|E_t(\xi_{t+j})| < \infty$ we need $|(B)^{-1}C| < 1$. If not, no stationary solution.

- Case II: only a pre-determined variable, $A\hat{\xi}_{t+1} + B\hat{\xi}_t = 0$:
  - We can write $\hat{\xi}_{t+1} = -(A)^{-1}B\hat{\xi}_t$. Given that the model DOES NOT impose an initial value $\xi_0$ for non-predetermined variable, only if $|(A)^{-1}B| > 1$ the solution will be unique ($\hat{\xi}_t = 0$ for all $t$). If $|(A)^{-1}B| \leq 1$ we will have infinite stationary solutions.

## Existence and uniqueness of the solution of a linearized model (continued)

- For the more general case, split $\hat{\xi}_t = [x'_t, c'_t]'$: predetermined and non-predetermined.
- Defining the vector $w_t = [x'_{t-1}, c'_t]'$, re-write the linearized equilibrium conditions as

$$\mathbf{A}E_t [w_{t+1}] = \mathbf{B}w_t + D\epsilon_t,$$

- Assume $\mathbf{A}$ is invertible (if not, other techniques such as the QZ decomposition could be used, see appendix).
- The conditions for uniqueness are related with the absolute value of the eigenvalues of $\mathbf{A}^{-1}\mathbf{B}$.

## Existence and uniqueness of the solution of a linearized model (cases)

Cases depending on the eigenvalues of $\mathbf{A}^{-1}\mathbf{B}$.

- **Unique solution**: if the number of stable (less than one in modulus) eigenvalues is the *same* as the number of predetermined variables in $\hat{\xi}_t$.

- **No Solution**: if the number of stable eigenvalues is *smaller* than the number of predetermined variables in $\hat{\xi}_t$.
  - This happens because there are some pre-determined variables that have an explosive eigenvalue and therefore for a solution to exist we cannot assign arbitrary initial values to those state variables.

- **Infinite solutions**: if the number of stable eigenvalues in is *larger* than the number of predetermined variables in $\hat{\xi}_t$.
  - This happens because there are some non-predetermined variables that have a stable eigenvalue and therefore we need to give them an initial value. But the equilibrium does not impose any restriction about initial values for control variables, so any possible value will work. Also called an "indeterminate" solution.

## Finding the solution for the general case

- Recall that we want to solve,

$$\mathbf{A}E_t [w_{t+1}] = \mathbf{B}w_t + D\epsilon_t,$$

where $w_t = [x'_{t-1}, c'_t]'$.

- If $\mathbf{A}$ is not invertible, we can use is the Generalized Schur decomposition (a.k.a. QZ decomposition).
- The generalized Schur decomposition of $\mathbf{A}$ and $\mathbf{B}$ is given by upper triangular matrices $a$ and $b$ and orthonormal matrices $q$ and $z$ satisfying:

$$q\mathbf{A}z = a = \begin{bmatrix} a_{11} & a_{12} \\ 0 & a_{22} \end{bmatrix}, \quad q\mathbf{B}z = b = \begin{bmatrix} b_{11} & b_{12} \\ 0 & b_{22} \end{bmatrix}.$$

Recall that a matrix $z$ is orthonormal if $zz' = I$.

## Finding the solution for the general case (continued)

- Using these properties we can write
$\mathbf{A}E_t [w_{t+1}] = \mathbf{B}w_t + D\epsilon_t$
as
$q\mathbf{A}zz'E_t [w_{t+1}] = \mathbf{B}zz'w_t + qD\epsilon_t,$
or,

$$\begin{bmatrix} a_{11} & a_{12} \\ 0 & a_{22} \end{bmatrix} E_t\begin{bmatrix} \hat{y}_{1,t+1} \\ \hat{y}_{2,t+1} \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} b_{11} & b_{12} \\ 0 & b_{22} \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} \hat{y}_{1,t} \\ \hat{y}_{2,t} \end{bmatrix} + \begin{bmatrix} C_1 \\ C_2 \end{bmatrix}\epsilon_t$$

where,

$$\hat{y}_t = \begin{bmatrix} \hat{y}_{1,t} \\ \hat{y}_{2,t} \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} z'_{11} & z'_{12} \\ z'_{21} & z'_{22} \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} \hat{x}_{t-1} \\ \hat{c}_t \end{bmatrix}, \quad \begin{bmatrix} C_1 \\ C_2 \end{bmatrix} = qD.$$

## Finding the solution for the general case (continued)

- Assume, without loss of generality, that the we have ordered the system so that $b^{-1}_{22}a_{22}$ has all its eigenvalues less than one in modulus (the explosive eigenvalues in $a^{-1}b$, or $A^{-1}B$ if invertible).
- Then, the lower part of the system is,
$\hat{y}_{2,t} = b^{-1}_{22}a_{22}E_t(\hat{y}_{2,t+1}) - b^{-1}_{22}C_2\epsilon_t$.
- Solve the equation forward: $\hat{y}_{2,t} = -M\epsilon_t$, where $M = b^{-1}_{22}C_2$.
- Thus, given that $\hat{y}_{2,t} = z'_{12}\hat{x}_{t-1} + z'_{22}\hat{c}_t$, we can solve for $\hat{c}_t$ and get $\hat{c}_t = F_2\hat{x}_{t-1} + Q_2\epsilon_t$, with

$$F_2 = -(z'_{22})^{-1}z'_{12}, \quad Q_2 = -(z'_{22})^{-1}M.$$

## Finding the solution for the general case (continued)

- The upper part of the system is (replacing $\hat{c}_t$ for its solution)

$$(a_{11}z'_{12} + a_{12}z'_{22})F_2 E_t(\epsilon_{t+1}) + [(a_{11}z'_{11} + a_{12}z'_{12}) + (a_{11}z'_{21} + a_{12}z'_{22})Q_2]\hat{x}_t$$

$$= [(b_{11}z'_{21} + b_{12}z'_{22})F_2 + C_1]\epsilon_t + [(b_{11}z'_{11} + b_{12}z'_{12}) + (b_{11}z'_{21} + b_{12}z'_{22})Q_2]\hat{x}_{t-1}.$$

- Thus, using $E_t(\epsilon_{t+1}) = 0$, we can write

$$\hat{x}_t = (R^{-1}_2 D_2)\hat{x}_{t-1} + (R^{-1}_2 D_1)\epsilon_t.$$

- Finally

$$F = \begin{bmatrix} F_1 & 0 \\ F_2 & 0 \end{bmatrix}, \quad Q = \begin{bmatrix} Q_1 \\ Q_2 \end{bmatrix}.$$

## Finding the solution for the general case (continued)

- Notice, the solution is independent from the lags of $\hat{c}_{t-1}$, i.e. only lags of pre-determined variables (plus the shocks) are relevant to determine the value of all variables today.
- Thus, the solution can be written as

$$\hat{x}_t = F_1\hat{x}_{t-1}Q_1\epsilon_t$$

$$\hat{c}_t = F_2\hat{x}_{t-1} + Q_2\epsilon_t$$
